Use Website In A Screen-Reader ModeSkip to Content
↵
ENTER
Skip to Menu
↵
ENTER
Skip to Footer
↵
ENTER
Skip to content
Shop Ramen
Our Story
Login
0
Ramen Noodles Nutrition 101: How the Top Brands Stack Up
Published: July 9, 2020
|
Last Updated: December 16, 2020
Ramen Noodles Nutrition
Ask the average person what their favorite comfort foods are and there’s a good chance ramen will be right up there along with pizza, burgers, and burritos. But as you’ve gotten smarter about your eating habits, you may have made some changes. 

Whether that means you’re following a low-carb or keto lifestyle, the bottom line is you may wonder if your favorite ramen noodles can remain part of your regular routine. 

In this guide, we’ll take you through the highs and lows of ramen noodles nutrition and compare some top ramen brands so you can keep your health goals in check.

The Basics of Ramen Noodles Nutrition
Eating uncooked ramen GIF
When we talk about ramen noodles, we’re referring to instant noodles. You know, the kind of ramen that comes in the form of a dehydrated block wrapped in plastic, a disposable cup or bowl with a flavor packet. In other words, this is the ramen that kept you fed as a college student. 

Here’s a quick rundown of some key ramen nutritional facts:

The Highs of Ramen Noodles
Spoiler alert: While instant noodles are definitely convenient and affordable, the truth is they’re far from a nutritious meal option. Let’s take a closer look.

High in carbs: Because most commercial ramen brands are made with enriched wheat flour, they’re high in carbs. The average serving of instant noodles contains 40 grams to 80 grams of net carbs. Studies show eating processed carbohydrates is linked to metabolic syndrome, high blood pressure, high blood sugar, heart disease, high cholesterol, and diabetes.

High in saturated fat: While consuming healthy fats is a good idea, most ramen noodles are high in saturated fat, which is directly tied to coronary heart disease and strokes. Take one look at the total grams of fat on the nutritional label, and you’ll discover about half of the total fat in ramen noodles is saturated.

High in sodium: Although sodium is an essential nutrient for healthy muscles and nerves, most instant noodles have way too much. Consuming excessive amounts of salt increases your risk of stroke, heart disease, hypertension, calcium loss, and even stomach cancer.

High in additives: To extend shelf life and improve flavor, most ramen is loaded with artificial flavorings and coloring, as well as synthetic preservatives like TBHQ (tertiary butylhydroquinone). These additives are recognized as safe in small doses by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, but there’s some evidence that TBHQ is potentially carcinogenic and can damage DNA.

The Lows of Ramen Noodles
Although most instant ramen noodles are made with flour that’s enriched with small amounts of vitamins like iron, riboflavin, and folic acid, they still lack substantive nutritional value. Here are the nutrients missing from your average serving of ramen.

Low in nutrients: If you count on instant noodles to provide a nutritious meal, you’ll be out of luck. Instant ramen has no vitamin A, B vitamins, vitamin C, vitamin D, or any substantial amount of minerals, all of which are essential for proper body functioning.

Low in protein: Protein is necessary for overall good health. Not only is it an essential building block of bones, muscles, cartilage, and skin, but it also repairs tissue, oxygenates the blood, and regulates hormones. Traditional instant ramen is low in protein, which means you’re better off choosing a more nutritious option.

Low in fiber: Instant ramen offers very little fiber, which is crucial for good digestive health and regulating blood sugar levels. What’s more, protein and fiber can make you feel full longer and therefore help with weight management. Without these two critical components, you’re at a disadvantage. 

Low in antioxidants: Highly processed foods like instant ramen noodles fall short when it comes to antioxidants that fight inflammation and cardiovascular disease, cancer, and other health conditions.

Comparing Nutrition Facts of Instant Ramen Noodle Soup
Ramen noodles nutrition: Person picks up ramen with chopsticks
Now that you understand some of the basics of ramen noodles nutrition, you probably realize that eating instant noodles is better as an occasional indulgence rather than a regular go-to option. In fact, at least one study shows regular consumption of instant noodles is associated with a higher risk of metabolic syndrome.

Still, not all instant ramen is created equal. (Don’t worry — we’ll soon show you the silver lining.) Check out the nutrition stats on the most popular instant ramen brands to see how they stack up:

Nissin
Creator of the famed Top Ramen noodles, Nissin is the Japanese brand that made instant noodles all the rage. However, when you skim the nutrition facts of one cup of Nissin’s Cup Noodles (chicken flavor, dry), things don’t look so bright:

Calories: 290
Net carbs: 39 grams
Protein: 6 grams
Dietary fiber: 2 grams 
Sodium: 1160 milligrams 
Nongshim
The best-selling instant noodle brand in South Korea, Nongshim offers a variety of noodles including the popular Shin Ramyun cups and bowls. The nutritional profile of one Shin cup of noodle soup looks like this:

Calories: 360
Net carbs: 44 grams
Protein: 6 grams
Fiber: 3 grams
Sodium: 1310 milligrams
Maruchan 
This popular Japanese-American brand produces a range of instant ramen noodles including precooked blocks, cups, and bowls. When looking at Maruchan’s labels, you’ll notice the serving size is half a block of ramen. It’s an unrealistic serving of food, so here’s the nutritional value for a full block of Maruchan chicken flavor ramen:

Calories: 380
Net carbs: 50 grams
Protein: 8 grams
Fiber: Less than 2 grams
Sodium: 1660 milligrams
immi
As the world’s first low-carb, high-protein instant ramen, immi is truly in a league of its own. Compared to other regular ramen brands, immi has at least five times more protein, double the fiber, and about 30-40% less sodium. What’s more, unlike the other brands on this list, only immi instant ramen noodles are keto-friendly and 100% plant-based.

Net carbs: 9 grams
Protein: 40 grams
Fiber: 6 grams
Sodium: 850 milligrams
How to Improve Ramen Noodles Nutrition
Animated bowl of ramen GIF
While the majority of instant ramen won’t win any awards for nutritional value, you can make some simple adjustments to make it more nourishing:

Add protein such as chicken, pork, beef, shrimp, tofu, or eggs
Add veggies to amp up the vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants
Use lower-sodium vegetable, chicken, or beef broth with herbs and seasonings
For more ideas, don’t miss our growing list of ramen recipes and healthy ramen hacks and tips to make your noodles more nutritious and delicious. 

Have Your Ramen and Eat It Too
Instant ramen noodles are easy, inexpensive, fun, and nostalgic. But eating traditional, unhealthy instant ramen brands on a regular basis is not the best general nutrition advice. 

Most conventional instant ramen noodle brands are loaded with carbs, saturated fats, sodium, and additives that are detrimental to your health. They’re also seriously lacking in protein, fiber, and overall nutritional value. 

Fortunately, you don’t have to entirely give up on one of your favorite comfort foods. Simple modifications like adding protein and veggies can make a big difference. 

But the biggest (and easiest) way you can make it work is by choosing immi ramen. Its low-carb, high-protein goodness lets you enjoy the tasty instant noodle experience you love every single day without the nutritional drawbacks.


Enjoyed this read? 

Join our newsletter for access to special deals, recipes and exclusive benefits.

First Name
Email
SUBSCRIBE
WHAT TO READ NEXT
The Sodium Myth Debunked: Why Salt is Not the Enemy [Backed by Science]
The Sodium Myth Debunked: Why Salt is Not the Enemy [Backed by Science]
Sodium is not the dietary villain that it's made out to be. We expand on this and discuss salt and sodium with regards to...

How Long Does Ramen Last? We Break It Down
How Long Does Ramen Last? We Break It Down
You’ve been there: You open your fridge in the middle of a midnight craving and begin to wonder, how long does ramen last? Well,...

What’s the Difference Between Phở and Ramen? (Differences and Similarities, Explained)
What’s the Difference Between Phở and Ramen? (Differences and Similarities, Explained)
Phở and ramen are like apples and oranges. They’re both Asian noodle dishes that are a great meal year round, but that’s pretty much...

Can You Eat Ramen Raw? Separating Facts From Fiction
Can You Eat Ramen Raw? Separating Facts From Fiction
Yes, you can eat ramen “raw” — at least the instant kind. If you’ve ever tried ramen, then you might have wondered whether you’re...

Instagram
Instagram
@immieats
Instagram
Instagram
immieats
SHOP
Variety Pack
Beef
Chicken
Shrimp
LEARN
Our Story
Recipes
Ramen Toppings
Blog
FAQ
IMMI
Account
Refer Friends
Ambassador Program
Wholesale
Store Locations
Contact Us
Join our newsletter for access to special deals, recipes and exclusive benefits.
Email
First Name
United States
Phone (optional for secret deals)
By submitting, you agree to our terms & conditions.

SIGN UP
2023 immi. All rights reserved.

Facebook
Instagram
TikTok
Accessibility
Terms
Privacy



What to Know About Ramen Noodles
 Written by Nicklya Harris-Ray
 Reviewed by Dany Paul Baby, MD on November 14, 2022
IN THIS ARTICLE
What Are Ramen Noodles? What Are Ramen Noodles Made Of? Where Do Ramen Noodles Come From? Are Ramen Noodles Healthy? How To Make Ramen Noodles  How To Make Ramen Healthier
Ramen noodles are not a dish that is associated with a good meal or anything near healthy. It gives a nostalgia for college days and eating them in your dorm after the cafeteria closed. These fried noodles are full of salt and have no protein or veggies. Most Americans equate ramen to the inexpensive fried noodles that come with the little seasoning packets. But there is a world of ramen outside of the little orange and red plastic and styrofoam containers they come in.

What Are Ramen Noodles?
Ramen noodles are little bricks of dried noodles. They come with a flavor packet that is very high in sodium and has no nutritional value. Ramen is a Japanese noodle soup that is popular both in Japan and worldwide. Even though there are numerous variations, the mainstay of ramen noodles is a broth base, long thin wheat noodles, and various toppings. In the US, ramen noodles are mostly associated with the dried content of the loud colored packaging. But to understand the dish, it should be considered a soup that contains noodles, not just noodles.


What Are Ramen Noodles Made Of?
The noodles in ramen are thick and straight or they can be thin and curly. A heavier broth usually contains a thicker noodle, but sometimes ramen restaurants will allow those dining in to choose both a broth base and the style of noodle. But all ramen noodles are commonly made from wheat flour, water, salt, and kansui, an alkaline mineral. Kansui gives noodles their elasticity and chewiness. It also gives ramen its yellow color. For this reason, ramen noodles may sometimes be thought to have egg as an ingredient, but they do not.



ADVERTISEMENT

According to USDA.gov, one packet of ramen noodles (81g) contains 14g of total fat and 6.58 g of total saturated fat, which is around 33% of your daily recommended intake. Ramen noodles are low in fiber, vitamins, minerals, and protein. They are very filling, but ramen noodles offer almost no nutrition but many calories. To preserve ramen in its storage condition, it is preserved with tertiary-butyl hydroquinone (TBHQ). It is a petroleum-based product that is hard to digest and is also found in pesticides and lacquers. It makes the noodles hard to digest, therefore allowing the body to be exposed to this chemical for a longer period of time than normal. It will also impede your body from taking in other nutrients. You may experience nausea and vomiting if exposed to it for too long.

Related


Where Do Ramen Noodles Come From?
It is believed that ramen noodles originated in China and were eventually introduced to Japan. But ramen is a common and popular dish in Japanese diets and throughout all of Asia. Japan has a large selection of dried, pre-packaged ramen containers ready to be boiled and seasoned. But fresh ramen can be found literally everywhere, including tiny alleyways to ramen restaurants. 

Another difference in Japan is the presence of vegetables. A bowl of fresh ramen may have an abundance of vegetables that may include:

bean sprouts 
bamboo shoots
scallions 
leeks
seaweed
other green veggies
Also, fresh ramen will contain some protein in Japan. The most popular choice is a slice of pork. Some come with a fish paste or cake, and some with a soft-boiled egg. You may also find fried tofu.


Are Ramen Noodles Healthy?
Is there a difference between the noodles we see in Japan and those eaten here? Is ramen noodle nutrition different? Most noodles in Japan are fresh. Every shop does not make noodles from scratch, but larger cities will have famous shops that hand-make their noodles. Also, the broth will provide the flavor, which consists of pork, soy, miso, or salt. You can find some fish stock, but most broths are meat-based and high in sodium. But the Japanese do not drink all of the broth.

Ramen noodles have been shown to increase metabolic syndrome in women. The ones who eat instant noodles over two times a week, are 68% more at risk to develop metabolic syndrome. This is regardless of how many other healthy dishes they eat or if they have a high level of physical activity. The culprit is the highly processed ingredients like saturated fat and high sodium. They contribute to high blood sugar, high blood pressure, heart disease, stroke, and diabetes. 

Heart disease includes the risk of heart failure. Sodium is a direct cause of increased blood pressure which can directly lead to stroke and heart failure. According to USDA.gov, generic ramen noodles contain 1503 mg of sodium, which comes around to 65% of the daily FDA-recommended intake. They can elevate your combined daily salt intake without you knowing. Your risk increases each time you eat packaged ramen noodles.

Related


How To Make Ramen Noodles 
Making ramen noodles is very simple. Boil two cups of water. Then drop in the noodles and cook them for three minutes. Lastly, stir in the seasoning packet that came in the container. If you are very particular, you may choose to use an easier cooking option like a microwave. There is also a complicated method. The site Epicurious states you should add the seasoning to the boiling water prior to adding the noodles. From there you could slow the cooking process by removing the noodles from the broth after two minutes. Then fan the noodles and eat.


How To Make Ramen Healthier
Throw away the shiny packet of sodium seasoning! Replace it with low-sodium chicken or bone broth. For extra flavor, you can add a chicken breast to the boiling broth and then shred it. Something else you can do is to add chopped-up veggies to the top like cabbage, carrots, or mushrooms, and then sprinkle green onions. Your ramen will now have additional vitamins, nutrients, and minerals. Want protein? Add a boiled egg or tofu. Upscale ramen spots will often serve an egg on the side due to its nutritional value and its great taste.